+++
title = "Frontend Rendering - (Part 1)"
date = 2024-05-04
+++

# Intro

Frontend rendering is a segmented field.

To be fair, there are millions of tools and frameworks out there, but a large majority of them are *non-cross-platform*.
The rendering logic for an application written in Swift for iOS *cannot* be ported over to generate an Android application.
You will need to re-write your rendering logic for your Android application in Java/Kotlin.
This creates a duplication of logic written in two separate languages managed by, presumably, two separate teams.

There do exist some tools out there that bridge this gap, the most notable being [React Native](https://reactnative.dev).
React Native is a phenomenal tool and, especially aided by [Expo](https://expo.dev), it opens up quick and fast iteration by small teams to produce a *native* application available for both platforms *without* having two separate codebases.
This makes React Native especially appealing to startups; in fact, check out any startup's job listings and (if they're producing a native application), you will most likely see a listing for a React Native developer.

Another *more* notable cross-platform solution does exist, however.
HTML rendering engines (primarily found inside of internet browsers).
HTML sent across the wire to a client and rendered in an HTML-rendering-engine is essentially cross-platform.
The HTML-rendering-engine could be embedded inside of Safari running on a Mac or iPhone, or inside of Firefox running on a Linux PC, or inside of Edge running on a Windows.
The point is: HTML can be written once and be rendered on virtually any device that has a browser with an HTML-rendering-engine[^1].

## Limitations

The only catch here is that HTML was designed with a very basic function in mind: it was designed to render a simple web *page*.
Emphasis on the *page* here.
A web page is a simple thing.
It contains text and maybe a little bit of styling.
But other than that, *not much else*.
Most importantly, it does *not* contain animations, widgets, dynamic user-flows, etc.
Those extra features were products of time.
As we progressed in time and as UI/UX research flourished, the UI requirements of websites quickly scaled.
Now all of a sudden, companies needed fancy widgets on their landing page.
They needed animations and stylings.
To fulfil this rampant uptick in frontend complexity, the simple HTML spec was padded, the CSS spec was padded, and a Javascript runtime to dynamically modify the DOM was added.

But the underlying smell still remained.
We've taken a technology that at its heart was designed for rendering simple web pages and augmented it past recognition.
The modern day HTML and CSS spec is a mess.

## Solution

Over the past couple of years, some phenomenal new technologies have been on the rise.
Two of which have especially piqued my interest: [WASM](https://webassembly.org) and [WebGPU](https://www.w3.org/TR/webgpu).
I think (in my admittedly naive perspective) that these two pieces of technology could solve the segmentation problem that we're seeing in frontend rendering, *without compromising on complexity*.

<br>
<br>
<br>

[^1]
This isn't strictly true.
It is possible to use *certain* HTML tags which are [not fully supported across all browsers and across all platforms and across all versions](https://caniuse.com).
This does mean that HTML is technically not fully cross-platform, *but given that most are supported in modern versions of modern browsers, it's cross-platform enough for the sake of this blog*.
